@node Development Tools, , Debugging Tools, Top
@appendix Development Tools

Here are some tools that you might find useful while developing code.

@menu
* Tags::                        
* CVS::                         
* SourceForge::                 
* VNC::                         
@end menu

@node Tags
@section Tags

Tags are an index to the functions and global variables declared in a
program.  Many editors, including Emacs and @command{vi}, can use
them.  The @file{Makefile} in @file{pintos/src} produces Emacs-style
tags with the command @code{make TAGS} or @command{vi}-style tags with
@code{make tags}.

In Emacs, use @kbd{M-.} to follow a tag in the current window,
@kbd{C-x 4 .} in a new window, or @kbd{C-x 5 .} in a new frame.  If
your cursor is on a symbol name for any of those commands, it becomes
the default target.  If a tag name has multiple definitions, @kbd{M-0
M-.} will jump to the next one.  To jump back to where you were before
you followed the last tag, use @kbd{M-*}.

@node CVS
@section CVS

CVS is a version-control system.  That is, you can use it to keep
track of multiple versions of files.  The idea is that you do some
work on your code and test it, then check it into the version-control
system.  If you decide that the work you've done since your last
check-in is no good, you can easily revert to the last checked-in
version.  Furthermore, you can retrieve any old version of your code
as of some given day and time.  The version control logs tell you who
made changes and when.

CVS is not the best version control system out there.  However, it's
free, it's ubiquitous, and it's fairly easy to use.  More to the
point, it's already available on the Leland machines you're using for
the projects.

For more information, visit the @uref{https://www.cvshome.org/, , CVS
home page}.

@node SourceForge
@section SourceForge

SourceForge is a web-based system for facilitating software
development.  It provides you with a version-control system (typically
CVS, as described above) and other tools for tracking your software.
You can use it to store files, track bugs, and post notes about
development progress.  It's also free.  You can set up your own
project in SourceForge at @uref{http://sourceforge.net, ,
sourceforge.net}.

@node VNC
@section VNC

VNC stands for Virtual Network Computing.  It is, in essence, a remote
display system which allows you to view a computing ``desktop''
environment not only on the machine where it is running, but from
anywhere on the Internet and from a wide variety of machine
architectures.  It is already installed on the Leland machines.  For
more information, look at the @uref{http://www.realvnc.com/, , VNC
Home Page}.
