@node Project Documentation, Debugging Tools, Coding Standards, Top
@appendix Project Documentation

When you submit your projects, you will be expected to also turn in
three files documenting them: @file{README}, @file{DESIGNDOC} and
@file{TESTCASE}.  These guidelines explain what we want to see in
those files.

Your submission should have exactly one of each file, in the
appropriate directory (e.g.@: for Assignment 1, place the files in the
@file{threads} directory).  These files must be written in plain text
format (not Microsoft Word, not PDF).  We recommend a text width of 65
characters per line, with a hard limit of 80.  If you use tab characters
in your document files, be sure that your text editor's tab width is set
to 8.

@menu
* README::                      
* DESIGNDOC::                   
* TESTCASE::                    
@end menu

@node README
@section @file{README}

This is the easiest of the bunch.  It's the document we'll read while
trying to get your assignment to run.  First, place all of your names
and Leland IDs (usernames) at the top.  Next, you should also explain
any quirks with your program, such as known show-stopper bugs, weird
dependencies, and so on.

If you added extra credit features to your project, explain them
concisely in the @file{README}.  Otherwise, we're likely to miss them.

@node DESIGNDOC
@section @file{DESIGNDOC}

This file is our primary tool for assessing your design.  Therefore,
you should be certain to explain your design in some decent amount of
detail.  As a broad rule of thumb, we should be able to explain what
basic data structures and algorithms you used to solve the problem
after reading the @file{DESIGNDOC}, but without looking at the code.

The easiest way to present your @file{DESIGNDOC} is to break it down
by parts of the project (e.g.@: for project 1, you can break the
@file{DESIGNDOC} into four parts).  For each part, you should describe
the functionality that needs to be added, the data structures and
algorithms used to solve that problem from a high level, and the
motivations for each decision/change you make to the code.  Your
@file{DESIGNDOC} needs to explain and justify your design.  That is,
we should be able to understand what you did, and why you chose to do
it that way.  The ``why'' should be in concrete terms of greater speed,
better space efficiency, cleaner code, or some other real measure of
goodness.

Things you @emph{don't} need: an explanation of the pre-existing
Pintos code, an explanation of the project spec, justification for the
project (e.g.@: we don't need you to explain to us why filesystems are
important to an operating system), a play-by-play of every change you
made to the system, any other pontificating.  (You may laugh at some
of the things listed above, but we've gotten all of them in the past.)
The @file{DESIGNDOC} needs to discuss design decisions and trade-offs
and the rationales behind them.  Any other things can be left out, to
save your time and ours.

Finally, please keep your @file{DESIGNDOC} as short as you can,
without sacrificing key design decisions.  You should be brief, yet
complete.  We don't want to read novels.

@node TESTCASE
@section @file{TESTCASE}

The @file{TESTCASE} file should contain all the information about how
you tested your programs.  At minimum, this file should contain the
output from all the tests that we've provided, with any explanations
needed to reproduce the output (arguments to the program, turning
features on the program on or off, and so on).

Additionally, you should detail all tests you write yourself.  You are
expected to write tests for features which our tests don't cover, and
to write some additional stress tests, since our tests will not
necessarily be too strenuous.  If you feel that such tests are not
required, you should explain why you feel so.  For each test that you
write, explain how we can use them, and show some sample output from a
run.

Specifically, here are some pointers for writing @file{TESTCASE} files
which will make them more succinct and us more likely to understand the
tests you write:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Show us that you tested each part of your assignment.

@item
Clearly state in your @file{TESTCASE} file what each test is supposed
to test.  You should be testing not only the common case, but testing
corner cases.  Specify what criteria or issue is being tested.  For
example, in testing @func{thread_join} you would have specified that
you test @func{thread_join} when it is called multiple times on the
same child thread.

@item
Make your tests as succinct as possible.  Most students in the past
have done a great job with the testing of @func{thread_join},
creating very succinct short tests.  We like that.

@item
Your test cases should be placed in a subdirectory called
@file{testcases} within the project directory.  So for project 1, they
should be in @file{pintos/src/threads/testcases}.

@item
Think about what may actually crash your code.

@item
Think about what the compiler might do to your code.  Suppose you write
the following to test your virtual memory implementation's ability to
expand the stack:
@example
int main (void) @{
  int array[4096];
  array[123] = 234;
  return 0;
@}
@end example
@noindent The compiler is quite likely to notice that the value that you
write to the array is never used again and thereby decide not to write
it at all.  The result is that your test does not test anything at all.
@end itemize

Your @file{TESTCASE} file is also where you can show us the
improvements that your code makes to the performance of the system.
You should be able to show us ``before'' and ``after'' performance
data, and explain how the data shows the improvement.  For example,
for Problem 1-4, you should show us in the @file{TESTCASE} printouts
from a workload for the non-Solaris scheduler and the Solaris
scheduler and explain why the Solaris scheduler is better.

Finally, we cannot stress enough the importance of being brief and
complete.

Keep in mind that the quality of your testing is worth 10% of your
project grade.  The bulk of this will be determined from the
@file{TESTCASE} file.
