@node Introduction, Pintos Tour, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

Welcome to Pintos.  Pintos is a simple operating system framework for
the 80@var{x}86 architecture.  It supports kernel threads, loading and
running user programs, and a file system, but it implements all of
these in a very simple way.  In the Pintos projects, you and your
project team will strengthen its support in all three of these areas.
You will also add a virtual memory implementation.

Pintos could, theoretically, run on a regular IBM-compatible PC.  As
much fun as it might be, it is impractical to supply every student in
CS 140 with his or her own PC.  Therefore, we will run Pintos projects
in a PC simulator, that is, a program that simulates an 80@var{x}86
CPU and its peripheral devices well enough that unmodified operating
systems and software can run under it.  In class we will use the
@uref{http://bochs.sourceforge.net, , Bochs} simulator.  Pintos has
also been tested within @uref{http://fabrice.bellard.free.fr/qemu/, ,
qemu} and
@uref{http://www.vmware.com/products/server/gsx_features.html, ,
VMware GSX Server}.

These projects are hard.  CS 140 has a reputation of taking a lot of
time, and deservedly so.  We will do what we can to ease the pain,
such as providing a lot of support material, but to some extent there
is simply some amount of hard work that needs to be done.  Because
Pintos is a new system, it is also possible that some parts of the
projects are not only difficult, but more difficult than they should
be.  We welcome your feedback.  If you have suggestions on how we can
reduce the unnecessary overhead of assignments, cutting them down to
the important underlying issues, please let us know.

This chapter explains how to get started working with Pintos.  You
should read the entire chapter before you proceed to any of the
projects.

@menu
* Getting Started::             
* Pintos License::              
* Pintos Trivia::               
@end menu

@node Getting Started
@section Getting Started

To get started, you'll have to log into a machine that Pintos can be
built on.  For the purposes of CS 140, our ``officially supported''
Pintos development machines are the Sun Solaris machines managed by
Stanford ITSS, as described on the
@uref{http://www.stanford.edu/dept/itss/services/cluster/environs/sweet/,
, ITSS webpage}.  We will test your code on these machines, and the
instructions given here assume this environment.  However, Pintos and
its supporting tools are portable enough that it should build ``out of
the box'' in other environments, including the Linux machines managed
by ITSS.

Once you've logged into one of these machines, either locally or
remotely, start out by adding our binaries directory to your
@env{PATH} environment.  Under @command{csh}, the Stanford default
shell, you can do so with this command:
@example
set path = ( $path /usr/class/cs140/i386/bin )
@end example
@noindent
It might be a good idea to add this line into the @file{.cshrc} file
in your home directory.  Otherwise, you'll have to type it every time
you log in.

@menu
* Source Tree Overview::        
* Building Pintos::             
* Running Pintos::              
@end menu

@node Source Tree Overview
@subsection Source Tree Overview

Now you can extract the source for Pintos into a directory named
@file{pintos/src} by executing
@example
tar xzf /usr/class/cs140/pintos/pintos.tar.gz
@end example
Alternatively, retrieve
@uref{http://www.stanford.edu/class/cs140/pintos/pintos.tar.gz} and
extract it in a similar way.

Let's take a look at what's inside.  Here's the directory structure
that you should see in @file{pintos/src}:

@table @file
@item threads/
Source code for the base kernel, which you will modify starting with
project 1.

@item userprog/
Source code for the user program loader, which you will modify
starting with project 2.

@item vm/
An almost empty directory, where you will implement virtual memory in
project 3.

@item filesys/
Source code for a basic file system, which you will use starting with
project 2 but which you should not modify until project 4.

@item devices/
Source code for I/O device interfacing: keyboard, timer, disk, etc.
You will improve the timer implementation in project 1, but otherwise
you should have no need to change this code.

@item lib/
An implementation of a subset of the standard C library.  The code in
this directory is compiled into both the Pintos kernel and, starting
from project 2, user programs that run under it.  Headers in this
directory can be included using the @code{#include <@dots{}>}
notation.  You should have little need to modify this code.

@item lib/kernel/
Parts of the C library that are included only in the Pintos kernel.
This also includes implementations of some data types that you are
free to use in your kernel code: bitmaps, doubly linked lists, and
hash tables.

@item lib/user/
Parts of the C library that are included only in Pintos user programs.

@item tests/
Code for testing each project.

@item misc/
@itemx utils/
These files may come in handy if you decide to try working with Pintos
away from ITSS's Sun Solaris machines.  Otherwise, you can ignore
them.
@end table

@node Building Pintos
@subsection Building Pintos

The next thing to do is to try building the source code supplied for
the first project.  First, @command{cd} into the @file{threads}
directory.  Then, issue the @samp{make} command.  This will create a
@file{build} directory under @file{threads}, populate it with a
@file{Makefile} and a few subdirectories, and then build the kernel
inside.  The entire build should take less than 30 seconds.

Watch the commands executed during the build.  You should notice that
the build tools' names begin with @samp{i386-elf-}, e.g.@:
@code{i386-elf-gcc}, @code{i386-elf-ld}.  These are ``cross-compiler''
tools.  That is, the build is running on a Sparc machine (called the
@dfn{host}), but the result will run on an 80@var{x}86 machine (called
the @dfn{target}).  The @samp{i386-elf-@var{program}} tools, which
reside in @file{/usr/class/cs140/i386/bin}, are specially built for
this configuration.

Following the build, the following are the interesting files in the
@file{build} directory:

@table @file
@item Makefile
A copy of @file{pintos/src/Makefile.build}.  It describes how to build
the kernel.  @xref{Adding c or h Files}, for more information.

@item kernel.o
Object file for the entire kernel.  This is the result of linking
object files compiled from each individual kernel source file into a
single object file.  It contains debug information, so you can run
@command{gdb} or @command{backtrace} (@pxref{Backtraces}) on it.

@item kernel.bin
Memory image of the kernel.  These are the exact bytes loaded into
memory to run the Pintos kernel.  To simplify loading, it is always
padded out with zero bytes so that it is an exact multiple of 4 kB in
size.

@item loader.bin
Memory image for the kernel loader, a small chunk of code written in
assembly language that reads the kernel from disk into memory and
starts it up.  It is exactly 512 bytes long.  Its size is fixed by the
PC BIOS.

@item os.dsk
Disk image for the kernel, simply @file{loader.bin} followed by
@file{kernel.bin}.  This file is used as a ``virtual disk'' by the
simulator.
@end table

Subdirectories of @file{build} contain object files (@file{.o}) and
dependency files (@file{.d}), both produced by the compiler.  The
dependency files tell @command{make} which source files need to be
recompiled when other source or header files are changed.

@node Running Pintos
@subsection Running Pintos

To start the kernel that you just built in the Bochs simulator, first
@command{cd} into the newly created @file{build} directory.  Then
issue the command @code{pintos run}.  This command will create a
@file{bochsrc.txt} file, which is needed for running Bochs, and then
invoke Bochs.

Bochs opens a new window that represents the simulated machine's
display, and a BIOS message briefly flashes.  Then Pintos boots and
runs a simple test program that outputs a few screenfuls of text.
When it's done, you can close Bochs by clicking on the ``Power''
button in the window's top right corner, or rerun the whole process by
clicking on the ``Reset'' button just to its left.  The other buttons
are not very useful for our purposes.

(If no window appeared at all, and you just got a terminal full of
corrupt-looking text, then you're probably logged in remotely and X
forwarding is not set up correctly.  In this case, you can fix your X
setup, or you can use the @option{-v} option.)

The text printed by Pintos inside Bochs probably went by too quickly
to read.  However, you've probably noticed by now that the same text
was displayed in the terminal you used to run @command{pintos}.  This
is because Pintos sends all output both to the VGA display and to the
first serial port, and by default the serial port is connected to
Bochs's @code{stdout}.  You can log this output to a file by
redirecting at the command line, e.g.@: @code{pintos run > logfile}.

The @command{pintos} program offers multiple options for running
Pintos.  Specify these options on the command line @emph{before} the
@option{run} command.  Use @code{pintos help} to see a list of the
options.  You can select a simulator other than Bochs, although the
Leland systems only have Bochs installed.  You can start the simulator
running a debugger (@pxref{i386-elf-gdb}).  You can set the amount of
memory to give the VM.  Finally, you can set up how you want VM output
to be displayed: use @option{-v} to turn off the VGA display,
@option{-t} to use your terminal window as the VGA display instead of
opening a new window, or @option{-s} to suppress the serial output to
@code{stdout}.

The @command{pintos} program offers commands other than @samp{run} and
@samp{help}, but we won't have any need for them until project 2.

The Pintos kernel has its own command line that you can use to pass
options.  These options must be specified @emph{after} the
@option{run} command.  These options are not very interesting for now,
but you can see a list of them using the @option{-u} option, e.g.@:
@code{pintos run -u}.

@node Pintos License
@section Pintos License

Pintos is distributed under a liberal license that allows it to be
freely used, modified, and distributed.  Students and others own their
own code and may use it for any purpose.  In the context of Stanford's
CS 140 course, please respect the spirit and the letter of the honor
code by refraining from reading any homework solutions available
online or elsewhere.  (Source code for other operating system kernels,
such as Linux or FreeBSD, is of course fair game.)

Please refer to the @file{LICENSE} file at the top level of the Pintos
source distribution for license details.

There is NO WARRANTY for Pintos, not even for MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

@node Pintos Trivia
@section Pintos Trivia

The design of Pintos is inspired by Nachos, an instructional operating
system originally from UC Berkeley, and even uses a few pieces of
Nachos code.  Pintos is different from Nachos in two important ways.
First, Nachos requires a host operating system such as Solaris,
whereas Pintos runs on real or simulated 80@var{x}86 hardware.
Second, Nachos is written in C++, whereas, like most real-world
operating systems, Pintos is written in C.

The name ``Pintos'' was chosen for multiple reasons.  First, it was
named for a Mexican food to reflect that it was inspired by Nachos.
Second, Pintos is small and a ``pint'' is a small quantity.  Third,
like drivers of the eponymous car, students are likely to have trouble
with blow-ups.
